LANGUAGE TRANSLATOR
USER MANUAL

1. ABOUT THIS TRANSLATOR

This Language Translator is a web-based translation application built using HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and Python.

The application allows you to:
- Enter or paste text.
- Select the language of the input text.
- Select the language you want to translate into.
- Translate the text using an online translation service.
- Use your computer or device microphone to enter speech as text.
- Copy the translated result.
- Listen to the translated result using server-side text-to-speech.
- View the available language list dynamically.

The application does not use a manually maintained list of languages. The available translation languages are obtained dynamically from the translation service.

2. HOW THE TRANSLATOR WORKS

The application has two main parts:

A. Frontend
The frontend is the web page that you see in your browser. It is built with:
- HTML for the page structure.
- CSS for the appearance and dashboard design.
- JavaScript for user interaction, language selection, microphone input, translation requests, copying, and speech playback.

B. Python Server
The Python server:
- Hosts the frontend files.
- Provides API endpoints used by the webpage.
- Retrieves the current language catalog.
- Sends translation requests to the online translation service.
- Processes longer text safely by dividing it into smaller pieces when necessary.
- Provides the server-side text-to-speech function.
- Sends generated audio back to the browser.

The browser communicates with the Python server, and the Python server communicates with the required online services.

3. HOW TO START THE APPLICATION

For local use:

Step 1:
Open the project folder in a terminal.

Step 2:
Run:

python server.py

Step 3:
The Python server starts and normally opens the translator in your browser.

If the browser does not open automatically, open the local address shown in the terminal.

The default local port is 8000.

4. HOW TO USE TEXT TRANSLATION

Step 1:
Open the Language Translator.

Step 2:
In the Source Language box, select the language of the text you are entering.

Step 3:
In the Target Language box, select the language you want.

Step 4:
Enter or paste your text into the input text area.

Step 5:
Click the Translate button.

Step 6:
Wait for the translation to complete.

Step 7:
The verified translation is displayed in the output area.

If the translation service cannot be reached or returns an invalid response, the application displays an error instead of showing an unverified translation.

5. SOURCE LANGUAGE

The Source Language tells the translator what language your input text is written in.

For example:
- If you enter English text, select English.
- If you enter Hindi text, select Hindi.
- If you enter French text, select French.

Selecting the correct source language generally gives the translation service better information about the input.

6. TARGET LANGUAGE

The Target Language is the language in which you want to receive the translated result.

For example:

Source: English
Target: Hindi

The application translates the English input into Hindi.

7. HOW TO USE THE MICROPHONE

The microphone allows you to speak instead of typing.

Step 1:
Select the Source Language.

Step 2:
Click the microphone button.

Step 3:
If the browser asks for microphone permission, allow it.

Step 4:
Speak clearly into the microphone.

Step 5:
The browser converts your speech into text.

Step 6:
The recognized text is placed in the input area.

Step 7:
Select the Target Language if it has not already been selected.

Step 8:
Click Translate.

The speech-recognition language is selected dynamically according to the selected source language.

Important:
Microphone recognition depends on browser support and the permissions given to the browser. A secure website connection or localhost is recommended for microphone access.

8. HOW TO TRANSLATE SPEECH

The complete speech translation process is:

Speak into the microphone
        ↓
Browser speech recognition
        ↓
Recognized text
        ↓
Input text area
        ↓
Translation request
        ↓
Python server
        ↓
Online translation service
        ↓
Translated text
        ↓
Output area

The microphone itself recognizes speech. The translation system then translates the recognized text.

9. HOW TO COPY THE TRANSLATION

After a translation appears:

Step 1:
Click the Copy button.

Step 2:
The translated text is copied to the clipboard.

Step 3:
You can paste it into another application such as a document, email, message, or notes application.

Clipboard access may depend on browser permissions.

10. HOW TO LISTEN TO THE TRANSLATION

The Speak button uses the Python server's text-to-speech system.

Step 1:
Translate your text.

Step 2:
Make sure the translated result is displayed.

Step 3:
Click the Speak button.

Step 4:
The server identifies an appropriate voice for the selected target language.

Step 5:
The server generates audio.

Step 6:
The browser plays the generated audio.

The application dynamically obtains available server voices instead of using a hardcoded voice-language table.

If a suitable server voice cannot be generated, the application displays an error rather than silently speaking the translation using an unrelated language.

11. TRANSLATION AND SPEECH ARE DIFFERENT

Translation and speech generation are separate operations.

Translation:
Input text → translated text

Speech:
Translated text → audio

Therefore, a translation can work even if the speech service is temporarily unavailable.

12. LANGUAGE LIST

The language list is fetched dynamically from the translation service.

This means:
- The project does not depend on a manually hardcoded language list.
- The application can obtain the current language catalog when the server is running.
- The displayed languages come from the service response.

The exact languages available for translation and the exact languages available for speech may differ because translation and text-to-speech services have different capabilities.

13. ERROR HANDLING

The application is designed not to display an unverified translation when the translation service fails.

Possible errors include:
- Translation service unavailable.
- Internet connection unavailable.
- Translation request rejected.
- Server is not running.
- Microphone permission denied.
- Browser does not support speech recognition.
- Server voice service unavailable.
- No suitable voice is available for the selected language.
- Generated audio cannot be played.

If an error appears, read the message displayed by the application and correct the indicated problem.

14. IF THE BACKEND IS OFFLINE

If the page reports that the backend is offline:

Step 1:
Open a terminal in the project folder.

Step 2:
Run:

python server.py

Step 3:
Wait until the Python server starts.

Step 4:
Reload the translator page.

Do not open the HTML file directly using a file:// address. The application should be accessed through the Python server.

15. INTERNET REQUIREMENT

The application requires an internet connection for its online translation and server-side voice services.

The Python server itself runs locally or on a deployed server, but translation and server voice generation require access to their online services.

For deployment, the hosting platform must allow outbound internet connections.

16. DEPLOYMENT

The project can be deployed as a single Python web service.

Required files include:
- server.py
- requirements.txt
- static/index.html
- static/style.css
- static/app.js
- static/manual.txt

Install the dependencies with:

pip install -r requirements.txt

Start the application with:

python server.py

The server listens on the hosting platform's PORT environment variable when one is provided.

The application binds to 0.0.0.0 so that it can be accessed by a hosting platform.

17. PROJECT FILES

server.py
Contains the Python web server and API functions.

requirements.txt
Contains the Python packages required for server-side speech.

static/index.html
Contains the translator webpage structure.

static/style.css
Contains the dashboard appearance and layout.

static/app.js
Contains frontend logic for languages, translation, microphone input, copying, and speech.

static/manual.txt
Contains this user manual.

18. BASIC WORKFLOW

The normal workflow is:

1. Start the Python server.
2. Open the translator.
3. Select Source Language.
4. Select Target Language.
5. Type text or use the microphone.
6. Click Translate.
7. Read the translated result.
8. Click Copy if you want to copy it.
9. Click Speak if you want to hear the translated result.

19. IMPORTANT NOTES

- Keep the Python server running while using the application.
- Keep an active internet connection for translation and server voice.
- Allow microphone permission when using speech input.
- Use a supported modern browser.
- Select the correct source and target languages.
- Do not rely on server speech if the selected language has no suitable available voice.
- If a service is temporarily unavailable, try again later.
- Do not open index.html directly; use the Python server.

20. SUMMARY

This translator provides a complete text and speech-assisted translation workflow.

It dynamically obtains languages, accepts typed or microphone-generated text, sends the text through the Python server for translation, displays the translated result, allows the result to be copied, and can generate server-side speech for the translated text when a suitable voice is available.

The system is designed to report service failures clearly rather than replace failed translations with an unrelated or unverified result.
